.\" lamboot-tools(7) — suite overview
.\" Hand-authored; companion to registry-generated (1) pages.
.TH "LAMBOOT-TOOLS" "7" "2026-04-22" "lamboot-tools 0.2.0" "lamboot-tools"
.SH NAME
lamboot-tools \- The Linux UEFI boot toolkit
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBlamboot-tools\fR suite is a comprehensive CLI toolkit for diagnosing,
repairing, migrating, and maintaining UEFI boot configurations on Linux
systems. Built by the authors of LamBoot; works on any Linux system
regardless of installed bootloader.
.PP
The toolkit treats GRUB, systemd-boot, rEFInd, Limine, and LamBoot as
first-class peers. Diagnostic output classifies bootloaders honestly
without steering users toward any particular choice.
.SH TOOLS
.SS Core tools
.TP
.BR lamboot-diagnose (1)
Generic UEFI boot-chain diagnostic scanner (flagship). 11 check categories,
~30 checks, unified JSON output with remediation URLs for every
warning+ finding.
.TP
.BR lamboot-esp (1)
EFI System Partition health check, inventory, and cleanup. Bootloader-
critical-safe file removal.
.TP
.BR lamboot-backup (1)
UEFI boot configuration snapshot and restore. save / restore / show / list
subcommands with schema v1 JSON snapshots.
.TP
.BR lamboot-repair (1)
Online + offline boot repair. Six-phase flow (diagnose / plan / show /
confirm / execute / verify) with risk tiers (safe / moderate / destructive).
.TP
.BR lamboot-migrate (1)
Automated BIOS\(->UEFI migration and cross-bootloader migration.
10-phase pipeline with top-5+2 failure guardrails, distro-aware
bootloader recipes, verification suite, rollback support.
.TP
.BR lamboot-doctor (1)
Guided diagnose\(->repair\(->verify wrapper. Single sudo escalation
per run; policy-matrix-driven decisions. Never auto-invokes
\fBlamboot-migrate\fR \(em BIOS\(->UEFI conversion is always user-initiated.
.TP
.BR lamboot-uki-build (1)
Host-side Unified Kernel Image builder wrapping ukify/objcopy/sbsign.
build / inspect / sign / verify subcommands.
.TP
.BR lamboot-signing-keys (1)
Dual-mode Secure Boot key lifecycle tool covering both release-engineering
and user-facing workflows. Enforces RSA-2048 for MOK-enrolled keys per
Debian bug #1013320.
.TP
.BR lamboot-toolkit (1)
Suite dispatcher and unified entry point. \fBlamboot-toolkit status\fR
enumerates installed tools; \fBlamboot-toolkit help\fR routes to per-tool
help.
.TP
.BR lamboot-inspect (1)
LamBoot-specific deep introspection (Python). Mirrored from the LamBoot
bootloader's own repository. Surfaces only when LamBoot is installed.
.SS Proxmox VE companion (\fBlamboot-toolkit-pve\fR package)
.TP
.BR lamboot-pve-setup (1)
Per-VM LamBoot integration setup: fw_cfg args: append, hookscript
attachment, per-VM JSON at
.IR /var/lib/lamboot/<VMID>.json .
.TP
.BR lamboot-pve-fleet (1)
Fleet-wide inventory, setup, status, and reporting.
.TP
.BR lamboot-pve-monitor (1)
Host-side NVRAM health reader for LamBoot VMs.
.TP
.BR lamboot-pve-ovmf-vars (1)
OVMF variables builder with cert pre-enrollment for Secure Boot pre-enrolled
VM templates.
.SH UNIVERSAL FLAGS
Every tool accepts the universal flags listed in each per-tool (1) page.
Key flags:
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit unified JSON output per the schema in
.BR lamboot-tools-schema (5).
.TP
.B \-\-dry-run
Preview what would change without executing. Mandatory for every tool
that mutates state.
.TP
.B \-\-suggest-next-command
Print the recommended follow-up command based on output findings.
.SH UNIFIED JSON OUTPUT
Every tool emits a consistent envelope when \fB\-\-json\fR is passed:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "tool": "lamboot-diagnose",
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "toolkit_version": "0.2.0",
  "timestamp": "...",
  "host": "...",
  "run_id": "...",
  "exit_code": 0,
  "summary": {"status": "pass", "findings_total": N, "findings_by_severity": {...}},
  "findings": [...],
  "actions_taken": [...],
  "backup_dir": null
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Each finding has a dotted-path \fBid\fR, \fBcategory\fR, \fBseverity\fR
(critical/error/warning/info), \fBstatus\fR (pass/warn/fail/skip),
\fBtitle\fR, \fBmessage\fR, \fBcontext\fR (tool-specific data), and a
\fBremediation\fR object with \fBsummary\fR, \fBcommand\fR, \fBdoc_url\fR
for every finding at warning severity or above.
.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
.B 0
Success / healthy state
.TP
.B 1
Fatal error
.TP
.B 2
Partial \- some operations succeeded, some failed
.TP
.B 3
Nothing to do (already in requested state)
.TP
.B 4
Refused due to a safety check (hybrid MBR, Windows present, etc.)
.TP
.B 5
User declined interactive confirmation
.TP
.B 6
Operation does not apply to this system
.TP
.B 7
Required tool or capability is missing
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/lib/lamboot-tools/lamboot-toolkit-lib.sh
Shared library with common functions (ESP detection, dry-run wrapper,
JSON emission, offline mode, backup discipline).
.TP
.I /usr/lib/lamboot-tools/lamboot-toolkit-help.sh
Help registry driver.
.TP
.I /var/backups/lamboot-*-<timestamp>/
Backup directory for any mutating tool run. Each contains MANIFEST.json
plus per-tool artifacts.
.TP
.I /etc/lamboot/fleet.toml
Shared configuration for PVE companion tools and lamboot-dev's hookscript.
See
.BR lamboot-pve-setup (1)
for schema.
.TP
.I /var/lib/lamboot/<VMID>.json
Per-VM state file written by
.BR lamboot-pve-setup (1)
and consumed by the lamboot-hookscript.pl at VM pre-start.
.SH PRIVILEGE MODEL
Read-only operations run unprivileged where possible. Tools that mutate
state require root and refuse with a clean error message if invoked
without sudo. No tool self-escalates mid-run \(em users always type
\fBsudo\fR explicitly, except
.BR lamboot-doctor (1)
which performs a single sudo re-exec per run via
\fB\-\-doctor-resume <run_id>\fR.
.SH OFFLINE MODE
Every tool except
.BR lamboot-migrate (1)
supports \fB\-\-offline\fR \fIDISK\fR, which auto-detects raw vs qcow2
format, sets up loopback or qemu-nbd, and mounts filesystems for read-only
inspection or read-write repair. Offline mode is essential for Proxmox
hosts diagnosing or repairing unmounted VM disks.
.SH RELATED PROJECTS
.TP
.B LamBoot
UEFI bootloader by Lamco Development. Available at
.UR https://lamboot.dev
.UE
and
.UR https://github.com/lamco-admin/lamboot-dev
.UE
.
.TP
.B IronRDP
RDP protocol library. Lamco contributes upstream.
.SH DOCUMENTATION
Full documentation at
.UR https://lamboot.dev/tools/
.UE
.
Per-finding deep-dives at
.UR https://lamboot.dev/tools/findings/
.UE
(the URLs emitted in every remediation.doc_url field).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lamboot-diagnose (1),
.BR lamboot-esp (1),
.BR lamboot-backup (1),
.BR lamboot-repair (1),
.BR lamboot-migrate (1),
.BR lamboot-doctor (1),
.BR lamboot-uki-build (1),
.BR lamboot-signing-keys (1),
.BR lamboot-toolkit (1),
.BR lamboot-tools-schema (5)
.SH AUTHORS
.B Lamco Development
.UR https://lamco.io
.UE
.SH LICENSE
MIT OR Apache-2.0
