.\" lamboot-tools-schema(5) — unified JSON output reference
.TH "LAMBOOT-TOOLS-SCHEMA" "5" "2026-04-22" "lamboot-tools 0.2.0" "lamboot-tools"
.SH NAME
lamboot-tools-schema \- unified JSON output schema v1 for lamboot-tools
.SH DESCRIPTION
Every tool in the
.BR lamboot-tools (7)
suite emits JSON conforming to the schema described in this page when
invoked with \fB\-\-json\fR. This schema is SEMVER-STABLE within major
toolkit versions: additive changes are permitted (new optional fields);
breaking changes bump the toolkit major version and \fBschema_version\fR
in lockstep.
.SH ENVELOPE
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "tool": "<tool-name>",
  "version": "<per-tool semver>",
  "toolkit_version": "<toolkit semver>",
  "timestamp": "<ISO-8601 UTC>",
  "host": "<hostname>",
  "run_id": "<ISO-timestamp-dashes-6hex>",
  "command": "<argv joined>",
  "dry_run": true|false,
  "exit_code": 0..7,
  "summary": {
    "status": "pass|warn|fail|noop|error|unsafe|abort",
    "findings_total": N,
    "findings_by_severity": {
      "critical": N,
      "error":    N,
      "warning":  N,
      "info":     N
    }
  },
  "findings":     [ <finding>, ... ],
  "actions_taken":[ <action>,  ... ],
  "backup_dir":   "<path>" | null
}
.fi
.RE
.SS Envelope fields
.TP
.B schema_version
Always \fB"v1"\fR in toolkit v0.2. Changes with major toolkit bumps.
.TP
.B tool
The executable name (\fBlamboot-diagnose\fR, etc).
.TP
.B version
Per-tool semantic version.
.TP
.B toolkit_version
The unified \fBlamboot-tools\fR release version bundling this tool.
.TP
.B run_id
Unique within host across time. Format:
\fB<ISO-timestamp-with-dashes>\-<6-hex-random>\fR. Correlates log lines,
backup dirs, and JSON output from one invocation.
.TP
.B command
Exact argv joined by single spaces. Any \fBtype-password\fR source values
are redacted to \fB***\fR.
.TP
.B exit_code
Matches the process exit code; always present, always accurate.
.SH FINDINGS
Each entry in \fBfindings[]\fR:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "id":          "<dotted.path.id>",
  "category":    "<broad-grouping>",
  "severity":    "critical|error|warning|info",
  "status":      "pass|warn|fail|skip",
  "title":       "<short summary>",
  "message":     "<detailed message with substitutions>",
  "context":     { <tool-specific keys and values> },
  "remediation": {
    "summary":   "<one-sentence plan>",
    "command":   "<suggested shell command>",
    "doc_url":   "<https://lamboot.dev/tools/findings/.../...>"
  }
}
.fi
.RE
.SS Finding IDs
Dotted-path stable identifiers: \fB<category>.<specific>[.<subspecific>]\fR.
Examples:
.IP
\fBesp.free_space\fR
.br
\fBbootloader.grub.pe_format\fR
.br
\fBfstab.uuid_form\fR
.br
\fBtrust.shim.absent\fR
.PP
IDs are SEMVER-STABLE within the toolkit's major version. Adding new IDs
is additive; renaming existing IDs is a major-version event.
.SS Severity vs status
These fields are orthogonal:
.IP
\fBseverity\fR answers "how bad is this if unaddressed":
.RS 2
.IP \(bu 2
\fBcritical\fR \(em booting the system will fail
.IP \(bu 2
\fBerror\fR \(em some capability broken (not boot-fatal)
.IP \(bu 2
\fBwarning\fR \(em works but risky or suboptimal
.IP \(bu 2
\fBinfo\fR \(em fine as-is, reported for visibility
.RE
.IP
\fBstatus\fR answers "what did this check report":
.RS 2
.IP \(bu 2
\fBpass\fR \(em check ran, expected condition met
.IP \(bu 2
\fBwarn\fR \(em check ran, condition marginal
.IP \(bu 2
\fBfail\fR \(em check ran, condition failed
.IP \(bu 2
\fBskip\fR \(em check did not run (prerequisite missing, filter)
.RE
.SS Remediation
The \fBremediation\fR object is present for every finding at severity
\fBwarning\fR or above. Fields:
.TP
.B summary
One-sentence human-readable remediation plan.
.TP
.B command
Suggested shell command. \fBAdvisory only at v0.2\fR \(em never invoked
automatically by tools. A future \fBlamboot-toolkit run-remediation\fR
subcommand may execute these after confirmation; not in v0.2 scope.
.TP
.B doc_url
Always resolves to
.UR https://lamboot.dev/tools/findings/
.UE
sub-path. Every dotted-path ID has a permanent URL.
.SH ACTIONS
Tools that mutate state populate \fBactions_taken[]\fR. Each entry:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "action":      "<dotted.verb>",
  "target":      "<path-or-identifier>",
  "result":      "ok|fail|skipped|abort",
  "reversible":  true|false,
  "backup_ref":  "<path>" | null,
  "dry_run":     true|false,
  "details":     { <tool-specific> }
}
.fi
.RE
.PP
Verb namespace parallels finding IDs:
\fBpartition.create\fR, \fBfstab.rewrite\fR, \fBefibootmgr.create_entry\fR,
\fBesp.file_delete\fR, and so on.
.SH BACKUP DIRECTORY CONTRACT
When a tool writes a backup, it uses this layout:
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
/var/backups/lamboot-<tool>-<run_id>/
  MANIFEST.json         tool metadata + planned actions
  <per-tool artifacts>  tool-defined
  SUCCESS.flag          written iff verification passed
  ROLLBACK.log          append-only; rollback attempts
.fi
.RE
.PP
\fBMANIFEST.json\fR is authoritative \(em any tool reading a backup MUST
validate the manifest before acting.
.SH SCHEMA VERSIONING
Pinning: consumers should check \fBschema_version == "v1"\fR and handle
any non-matching version by aborting or falling back to a known-safe
pass-through.
.PP
\fBAdditive\fR changes (new optional fields, new severity/status tokens,
new category names): do NOT bump schema_version. Consumers that don't
know about new fields simply ignore them.
.PP
\fBBreaking\fR changes (field removal, renaming, semantics change): bump
\fBschema_version\fR AND the toolkit major version in lockstep.
.SH CONSUMPTION GUARANTEES
.IP \(bu 2
Every tool's \fB\-\-json\fR output passes \fBjq -e .\fR on stdout
regardless of the process exit code.
.IP \(bu 2
Every tool's \fB\-\-json-schema\fR output is a valid JSON Schema (draft
2020-12) describing the envelope and the tool-specific \fBcontext\fR
shape.
.IP \(bu 2
No log lines go to stdout when \fB\-\-json\fR is active. All human output
goes to stderr.
.IP \(bu 2
Color codes are suppressed on stdout when \fB\-\-json\fR is active.
.SH EXAMPLE
A typical
.B lamboot-diagnose
run (elided for brevity):
.PP
.RS 4
.nf
{
  "schema_version": "v1",
  "tool": "lamboot-diagnose",
  "version": "0.2.0",
  "toolkit_version": "0.2.0",
  "timestamp": "2026-04-22T14:37:22Z",
  "host": "laptop-01",
  "run_id": "2026-04-22T14-37-22-a1b2c3",
  "command": "lamboot-diagnose --json",
  "dry_run": false,
  "exit_code": 2,
  "summary": {
    "status": "fail",
    "findings_total": 19,
    "findings_by_severity": {"critical": 1, "error": 1, "warning": 2, "info": 15}
  },
  "findings": [
    {
      "id": "esp.free_space",
      "category": "esp",
      "severity": "warning",
      "status": "warn",
      "title": "ESP is 89% full",
      "message": "ESP at /boot/efi has 54 MB free of 512 MB",
      "context": {"esp_mount": "/boot/efi", "free_bytes": 56623104, "total_bytes": 536870912},
      "remediation": {
        "summary": "Remove stale kernel images to free space",
        "command": "sudo lamboot-esp clean --dry-run",
        "doc_url": "https://lamboot.dev/tools/findings/esp/free_space"
      }
    }
  ],
  "actions_taken": [],
  "backup_dir": null
}
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lamboot-tools (7),
.BR lamboot-diagnose (1),
.BR jq (1)
.SH LICENSE
MIT OR Apache-2.0
